on today's episode of hell theory with
Naveen Jane we covered the microbiome
how we're only 1% human the fact that
your DNA is not your destiny we talk
about his dad's cancer diagnosis how
we've helped my wife Lisa restore her
gut health and how biome is making
chronic disease a choice welcome to
health theory everybody today's guest is
Naveen Jain a self-made billionaire who
has dedicated his entire life to
addressing the biggest issues in human
health with his new company volume in
his own words he wants to make illness a
choice
so my question Naveen is how on earth do
we make illness a choice well most of
our health when you talk about really
comes from these chronic diseases and
the chronic diseases are whether it's a
Parkinson's Alzheimer's when you look at
depression anxiety or you look at OCD
ADHD obesity diabetes cancer or even all
the autoimmune diseases every one of
them is caused by one simple thing which
is a chronic inflammation and the
chronic inflammation happens because
your gut microbiome is out of balance as
you know the 70% of our immune system is
along our gut lining what we eat is what
feeds the microbiome and that actually
trains our immune system and when your
microbiome is out of balance your immune
system is out of balance
and when your body is out of balance it
is at not at ease and which is what we
call disease all right so let's back up
and give people a quick breakdown of
exactly what the microbiome is and the
coolest example I've ever heard you use
is talking about humans as a form of AI
that's basically meant to lug around the
microbiome explain that I thought that
was really a pretty powerful insight
yeah so actually you know you think
about there and say how did humans
actually got created and if you think
from the perspective of the nature as
you know on on our spacecraft we call
planet Earth
these are single-cell organism the you
crea arts and the bacteria and viruses
in the front a fungi and east and the
mold
around for billions of years the humors
are give or take up a couple of hundred
thousand years old so you wonder how did
humans got created so here is my tongue
in cheek a story of how I believe it
actually happened one day all these
organisms got together they were living
in Africa and they say you know we're
sick and tired of living in this a small
space we want to take over the world and
they all looked at each other and one of
the smarter one said you know I think I
know what to do what do you do what if
we can create something we are trillions
of us can live inside it all we have to
do is keep this thing healthy it's going
to walk around everywhere we're gonna
make them crave what we want they're
gonna find that food for us they're
gonna go all over the world they're
gonna poop everywhere they're gonna
spread us around and we're gonna take
over the world and they created human
and the humans as the humans were
evolving suddenly they started to worry
as you know vien you and I now worry
about artificial intelligence and we
keep wondering if this thing we just
created call artificial intelligence if
some day it got is smarter than us what
would happen to us and these guys were
no dumb they start thinking about that
and so one of the young one went to the
master it's a master master we created
this thing called humans what if this
thing got smarter than us what will we
do masters is not to worry how so master
he says right inside their cell they
call that mitochondria you know it's one
of our brothers right it's one of the
ancient bacteria we talk to it all the
time this thing is the energy factory
for their self they go out of control we
turn the energy off they're done there's
a master you're so brilliant until
another younger one said master master
you completely forgetting the point here
they're starting to develop this thing
called brain what are we going to do
with that masters is not to worry
remember most of us live inside the gut
we put a direct connection from the gut
right to their brain they call that a
vagus nerve and they they don't quite
remember just because they call it the
vagus nerve like Las Vegas what happens
in the gut doesn't stay in the gut it
goes everywhere
we in fact control what happens in their
brain and we
let them know what we want through
something they call neurotransmitters
since you're the member serotonin yeah I
remember serotonin it makes them feel
good yeah
guess what we produce 90 percent of the
serotonin right in the gut we don't let
them produce it they want to feel good
they gotta feed us and all the stuff
they controlled our amygdala through
their micro RNA interference they
control our prefrontal cortex so our
decision-making our behavior what we do
what we want is controlled by them and
you see young ones just remember like a
good leader we make them think they're
making a decision we rather want simply
pulling the strings so just sit back
enjoy and let them take care of us what
I love about that it's really one of the
first times I've heard somebody talk
about the microbiome coming first which
obviously from an evolutionary
standpoint it did yes and you know
talking about how nature really coops if
something works here then it's likely to
work there and I remember thinking one
time why are all viruses bad like why
are all of their symptoms negative the
runny nose the fever and then I realized
not we in fact I mean if you think about
us we are a walking talking ecosystem so
if you think from is in a spiritual
perspective or you think about from a
larger universe perspective we humans
are part of this larger ecosystem we
call environment we as humans our
environment in ourselves the trillions
of micro organism inside us we are a
ecosystem and when our ecosystem gets
damaged because we are feeding it the
wrong thing then our body essentially
starts to suffer and same thing when you
start to impact our outside environment
our body starts to impact because we're
part of this larger ecosystem the thing
that's most interesting is that it's
only now that we are able to understand
what is going on inside our body
it used to be completely a black box and
people always felt for the time they
always wanted to eat healthy but the
problem was no one knew what was healthy
and so you will come up with these fad
diet but you start to look at the Paleo
diet and you start to look at the key to
tighten the leptin diet and you know
every day there is a new fad diet the
fact is you and I share almost the
identical DNA 99.9 percent of our DNA is
identical when it comes to our organism
our environment inside our body less
than 5% is the same and that's the
reason there is no such thing called
inflammatory food or or a healthy food
because if food that's healthy for you
may not be healthy for someone else in
fact the food that's healthy for you
today may not be healthy for you in 3
months then explain to people why
exactly that is yeah so first of all if
you think about that our bodies are
extremely unique as I said and our
ecosystem inside the gut so every time
you eat food what's the first thing is
being encountered is encountered by the
microbiome and depending on their
ecosystem they are able to metabolize
that food and either produce the
nutrients that your body needs or it can
produce the toxins that actually hurt
the body and inflame the body so for
example is spinach most people who think
the spinach is healthy it turns out a
spinach is not healthy for me and the
reason is if spinach has a lot of
oxalate and if you don't have the
oxalobacter and your gut it's actually
not going to be meta oxalate cannot be
metabolized by the gut microbiome that
means it's now being fed by someone else
who is going to create and Lipa
polysaccharides which is LPS which is
going to cause inflammation in your body
so it turns out that as we have gone
through now tens of thousands of people
in are things we find 30 percent of the
people in our system today in fact
spinach is harmful to them losing yeah
and more than an interesting thing is
50% of the people that we see that think
or polyphenol everybody thinks the
pomegranate juice is good for them or
the walnuts are good for them or you
know the blueberries are good for them
all of these are really good for about
half the people other half you're simply
wasting your money it does nothing other
than stressing and harming your body
because you do not have the right
organisms to be able to digest them so
unlike everyone else in this field that
has
before us nobody has been able to see
what these microbes are actually doing
they only focused on who they were and
interesting thing is like us as humans I
mean were their only focus on who they
were
yeah so in a sense that that poo isn't
looking at the things that who are these
organisms what are their names
are the name Paul and Tom and John and
you know it's Paul Tom and John but this
Paul the plumber is Paul the
entrepreneur is Paul the electrician or
what is Paul actually doing so knowing
who they are doesn't tell you anything
until you know exactly the function they
are performing so if you think about by
knowing the organism it simply tells you
what they could do but just like any one
of us we have a potential but we could
be doing completely different things
depending on what else is around us so
if you talk you know fewer with me you
could be calm and quiet you could be
with Lisa you could be partying right so
depending on who else is with you you
change your behavior and simply based on
what is being fact to you you change
your behavior all right we got to unpack
this because this is so important for
people to understand so Joseph Campbell
has a quote that I think is insanely
powerful and is really a play here which
is if you want to change the world
change the metaphor and I feel like what
you're bringing to the table and what I
find so interesting about the
tongue-and-cheek story is it actually
forces us to change the metaphor and
think of us as a shell yeah that's
housing the microbiome and that the
microbiome in the fun story like
organizes gifts together builds the
structure and while that may not be sort
of mythologically true it's it really
gets you to start thinking about it in
the right way so okay now you think of
us as a shell and it gets that whole
notion of we're less than 1% human just
really fast explain that so basically we
have more foreign cells in our body than
the human self when it comes to gene
expression our human DNA only expresses
about 20,000 genes and the microbiome in
our gut produces about 22 million to 20
million genes so at best we have one
percent human from a gene expression
perspective or worse we appoint all one
percent you want just really crazy and
most people do not understand that and
and I wouldn't have understood it we'll
talk more
Lisa later I certainly would not have
understood that until seeing what she
was going through and trying to figure
that out and I had to change my metaphor
I had to think of the microbiome first I
had to start thinking about being an
ecosystem so alright we've got this
shell it's expressing one percent
roughly of the genes that are active in
within that shell but I'm more than that
I want to also talk about that one
percent and you know most people think
of our DNA as our destiny our genes are
our destiny it turns out the genes are
really not your destiny it is obviously
your microbiome but even within the
genes it is a gene expression that
counts not the genes in themselves and
here's what I mean by that every part of
our body has identical DNA
so our here are you know skin our lung
you know our heart everything has the
same DNA but they're completely
different it is the expression of the
same DNA that causes the thing to be
what they are
so that means Nature has put together
something called epigenetically that
means you can control what genes are
expressed what genes are over Express or
under Express now imagine what happens
our microbiome releases these things
called metabolites which are the small
molecules after they digest the food
they release these nutrients and
metabolites that are absorbed in our
blood
as a reaction to what is digest what did
I just did okay
and then these metabolites are absorbed
in our blood and guess what happens they
start to epigenetically start to control
our gene expression right this is so
important and that is really the key is
that D now can change the gene
expression of what is going on inside
the human body not only your immune
system whether it is under active or
active and essentially or saying this is
a friend or a foe they are training the
immune system but more importantly
they're also changing or gene expression
so for example what they found was
recently that the cancer is not only
caused by the microbiome and influenced
by microbiome two weeks ago they found
that pancreatic cancer is actually is
the microbes moving from the gut going
to pancreas shutting down the immune
system in the pancreas and let the
cancer go and they are
actually found that if you're able to
put the antimicrobial thing in the
apprentice and use the immunotherapy
this shank - a primary cancer by 50% in
three weeks
they found the Mayo Clinic that the
research about three four months ago
they seen the breast cancer is caused by
the microbiome they look at 1,600 breast
cancer tissues and found the same
microbiome what's more important there
is all the people that have that shared
is similar Mike yeah Mike similar
microbial very interesting in the end up
and in the cancer tumor mmm but more
about the cancer tumor has its own
microgram so cancer tumor had the
microbiome and here is more interesting
part the therapy for cancer whether it
works or it kills you depends on your
microbiome so the food is your
microbiome and the microbiome of the
cancer what your microbiome so it's very
interesting when you take a drug whether
it's a chemotherapy or it's
immunotherapy so chemotherapy drug
whether it actually works or completely
creates toxins and depends on your
microbiome that because the microbiome
is metabolize and anti-bill izing these
chemotherapy drug and sometime it turns
them into poison that is guaranteed to
kill you other time it detoxifies it it
doesn't kill cancer or it actually
amplifies and allows it to kill cancer
right immunotherapy the same way they
found the certain microbes that
microbiome would make it 10x more
impactful for immune system to attack
the cancer or it actually doesn't so
whether even not just the cancer is
caused by a microbe and whether the
cancer treatment works or does not work
depends on your microbiome
they found the same thing with PTSD they
found the depression is obviously the
inflammatory disease and when you fix
your gut I mean even our customers never
we don't go out as why um ever cure a
disease we fix the inflammation and we
fix the balance and you gut and some
people will tell us that hey I had
depression is gone I had anxiety it is
gone I had acne it is gone and there
were two women who went on dr. Oz Show
and one of them lost 71 pounds we were
not trying to happen happen lose weight
we simply she had inflammation in fixed
inflammation people have autoimmune
diseases IBD IBS
go through these diseases which are
simply the names we give to certain set
of symptoms the fact is all of these
diseases are fundamentally chronic
inflammation that can be controlled
through your diet right so the trick
really is not saying what is a healthy
food you need to say it's not about the
food it's about me what's healthy for me
not what's a healthy food because like
Hippocrates said right
all diseases begin in the gut one man's
food is another man's poison so his
spinach could be good for you it could
be toxin for you and then he said let
food be thy medicine let thy man it's
gonna be the food and we forgotten that
right yeah dude it's so crazy so I want
to really tie off this change in
metaphor that I think you're bringing
which is so important and if we can get
everybody to make this switch and really
start thinking about it then I think
they're gonna understand better why it's
so important what they eat totally
giving you that it's different for
everybody and it depends on the current
state of your microbiome not even just
let a snapshot last forever that it's
like very dynamic and what you're eating
influences your microbiome and all that
and we'll get into that but so you were
saying Bob Sallie whatever you want to
call your microbiome there not only is
there diversity but they will also act
differently in different circumstances
and so thinking of the microbiome is
sort of wrapping this human shell around
them but anthropomorphizing them so that
you understand that they have a
personality that they can get stressed
out that they're calm can affect your
calm so the microbiome obviously is in
some sort of communication with us but
get us to as close as the layman's
understanding of exactly how that
communication works so like for instance
if Lisa doesn't meditate in the morning
who doesn't sometimes even meditate
right before she eats just eating will
upset her stomach even though it's safe
food
yeah but meditating makes a difference
so so again remember that our body is
not a one-way tunnel it is a
bi-directional things right so the
stress that we have causes our
microbiome to change and when your
microbiome is upset it causes us to be
stressed or anxious or depressed right
so how what's the mechanism
mechanism is you know the depression or
anxiety is the inflammation right so
when you your microbiome is releasing
things like lipeh polysaccharides they
are absorbed in the blood that causes
the immune system to have a low-grade
inflammation and the low-grade
inflammation is what causes you to be
depressed right but why does it or how
does it how does inflammation have so
many varied responses yeah so think
about it inflammation is like a you know
a a constant body in a large situation
so your immune system is constantly
alert and one way for it to kill what
they think is the enemy is to create the
inflammation so it can engulf it and
essentially destroy it right but you
have that thing was really really good
when you actually had some communicable
disease or when you were trying to do
fight or flight for stress like it was
really good for body to get ready to
fight or flight right but when you are
in living in a modern society when you
are now stress is being caused by
relationships ice caused by because you
work environment is not right or you
know monetary thing go on in number of
other reasons what happens to your body
is constantly on that alert and it's
constantly releasing the cortisol and
your microbiome is saying first thing
meant by the way when you go into fight
or flight response is your digestive
system shuts down right so part of the
human our body for it to survive was
saying hey you're about to get attacked
by a tiger the last thing you need to
worry about is try to eat the thing try
to digest the thing you just eat just
shut down everything that's not
necessary right now right this movement
and only have the essential function be
working so digestive system is shut down
so when you are stressed essentially at
that point you digest system ation down
so the by meditating what you're doing
is taking the cortisol levels to
essentially down and that allows the
body and the microbiome to be
essentially saying okay you're no longer
in that fight-or-flight response let's
start the digestive system again but
what I really want to understand so
there's two things one I want to know
the mechanism by which they communicate
what you talking about optics which I
was like
the help so understanding how they're
using photons to actually communicate
and then part two is why sometimes
depression why sometimes anxiety why
sometimes cancer like how can
inflammation manifest in so many
different ways so first of all let's
start the last part for us if you look
at the chronic inflammation it's not
localized right so your whole body is
under inflammation and when your body's
under stress since it's all connected it
always breaks at the weakest link right
so if your whole body that is like think
of it like a chain and it's at this
point when there is under stress the
weakest part of the chain will break
first so let's assume you've been
drinking a lot and you have inflammation
boom your liver is the first one to go
right so if depending on wherever the
weakest thing is for other reasons in
your life that whatever the weakest sub
component is that is the first one to
break right and that's the reason you
find them in a different the same type
of inflammation may cause obesity in one
diabetes in someone else it may cause a
depression in one person it may cause a
autoimmune and someone else right
because at the end of the day depending
on wherever this thing pops up right and
you can and what our pharmaceutical
drugs are basically palpable right you
kill you essentially put this one down
suppress this symptom it pops up here
and then you get a new set of symptom
and you suppress that symptom you pop
three more symptoms now and then now by
the time you get to be sixty years old
you're taking more pills for your
breakfast than you need in the breakfast
right yeah and that's literally the
business model of our pharmaceutical
companies they really have become to
large extent a parasite on society
thriving on these chronic diseases and
interesting thing is chronic disease are
preventable
unlike the communicable diseases you
catch infection you don't catch obesity
you don't catch your diabetes you don't
catch a depression it is you develop it
over a long period of time right you do
share when you start to live together
you start to share your microbiome and
it's very interesting is there so many
studies done that the microbiome
actually not only within this
even cross-species causes the symptoms
to pop up so for example think of your
microbiome as as a fecal fecal matter
what they did is they took a microbiome
put that from a fat man to a mice and
the mice became fat there I'm a human
from human two different species
altogether and they took the microbiome
of a thin person gave it to the Mice and
mice became thin so it tells you that
not only the microbiome is positive it
is positive across species all right
really fast I got to stop you there so
obviously I've heard that through fecal
transplants you can take some and you
could do for mouse a mouse in you know
you could cross but what I want to
really bring home for people is the
mechanism that is at play there so has
to do with metabolites has to do with
like what what is the signaling that's
because somebody that's obese right now
thinks it's a moral failing no it's not
and so I why not so obesity is
inflammatory disease it is not your
fault
in fact you could eat less than anyone
else when people talk about and say oh
he can eat anything he wants and I eat
just a tiny bit food I get fat because
when you have a leaky gut and leaky gut
what I mean by there is you epithelial
cell that's supposed to keep the
microbiome and the food inside the colon
is now is leaking and going into the
blood the blood when these things and
food is leaked into the blood what
happened it freaks out and what only
freaks are what it is do inflammation
right so this inflammation happens
because you have a leaky gut and you get
allergies you get eczema you get all the
different types of things because you
you have a leaky gut so in Africa
transplant all you taking is one
ecosystem from one person and you
transfer a transferring that microbial
ecosystem into someone else so for
example if someone has taken antibiotics
and aren't been taking doses of
antibiotics have completely killed their
microbiome or people who have a see
different fraction so it's a it's a see
different fraction is a massive gut
inception and the only way to cure is to
take massive doses of antibiotics when
you do that you're literally throwing a
nuclear bomb inside your gut and killing
all these microbiome
and and then you repopulate or
repopulate definitely populate them
through the fecal matter transplant it's
very interesting is one of the person
actually got a fecal matter transplant
after see different fraction and
suddenly his personality changed
he became obese and depressed and it
turns out that the microbiome it came
from a person who was fat and depressed
right so literally the symptoms got
transferred from microbiome even I know
somebody watching right now saying this
is black magic it's witch doctor II
stuff even I part of it I'm like oh God
can't really be that straightforward
he's very interesting one big any
disease and google it for yourself and
read the research paper so just type in
Parkinson's and microbiome type in
depression and microbiome type in
autoimmune disease the microbiome type
in cancer and microbiome type in
diabetes and microbiome and you'll start
to see the impact all the researches
these are done he is another interesting
one
they had a diabetic person who's been
taking metformin drug which is for
diabetes metformin does not work on the
human body it works on the microbiome
okay right so it changes your gut
microbiome and here is how we know it
because they took that microbiome the
person who's been taking metformin gave
it to the mice who is diabetic just by
transferring the microbiome it had the
same impact as if the mice was taking
metformin Wow right because it works on
your microbiome as you know the gut
microbiome is the root cause of all
other diseases so when you fix you got
microbiome you're fixing the cancer and
other diseases are also impact at the
same time but there's a depression focus
ADHD all those diseases are basically
inflammatory diseases we're really
fastest talk so if I'm not mistaken your
dad was just diagnosed recently with
cancer yeah yeah so walk me through that
like what are you doing how do you get
aggressive about it I mean so honestly
that was one of those things that
makes me pause about life and I was
thinking that you know Here I am talking
about all the things that you could do
simply by fixing your gut and as you
know we started this company a year ago
and we have learned so much about how
human body works we are challenging the
things that people did not know about
human body because for the first time
you're able to see the things that are
going on inside your body and when he
called me about two months ago and said
he had a pancreatic cancer and all I
could do was to say oh my god
what if I had started this company two
years ago or three years ago I would
have been going to fix it
and all I can do is really at this point
I don't know what to do other than to
see and hope that no one else has to
suffer through that right he has to go
through the chemotherapy right now and
is going through the you know
chemotherapy yeah but just with him two
weeks ago and seeing him you know you
know just not be himself losing constant
weight his hair is gone and he's just
shrinking and watching him just feels
odd really feels on and you wash
something you could fix I mean and so I
saw this research on pancreatic cancer I
called his oncologist and I say have you
seen this research and he's oh they're
so new and I say why can't you use this
and he says it's not allowed
and I'm thinking what could I mean I can
I'm thinking I could just tell the doc
hey this research is good do this what
is the harm here but the doctor has
ethical duty that he's not gonna
implemented because it's not allowed
it's not FDA approved so anyway my only
hope is that someday and that day will
be soon it will be our generation Tom
that will one day absolutely make these
chronic diseases simply a matter of
choice and I'm absolutely convinced at
this point and I am determined that I'll
do whatever it takes
so that no one ever have to suffer
through any chronic diseases and and I
know it is doable and I know we are
finding every single day what causes
these diseases and how we can modulate
these diseases simply through diet and
we're gonna look back at these movements
five years ten years from now and we're
going to realize that we were the first
generation that wiped off the chronic
diseases from the face of this earth and
someday people will look at our
generation is the one that used the
exponential technologies to create
abundance of energy created abundance of
food and solved all of the global grand
challenges that I've been facing our
species the human species for
generations and we're going to solve
them because they're going to be people
like you i and others listening to our
podcast and I'm gonna say enough is
enough you and I can do things and that
is the beauty of the things I find is
that it used to be the large companies
the you know the robber barons and the
heirs to create some the only one who
had power to do something audacious and
what's really amazing is this is the
first time in the human history that
individuals and a small group of people
are capable of doing things that could
only be done by super powers there could
only be done by the large companies it
doesn't require the lot of financial
resources the cost of these things are
coming down so fast just to do that
think about it to do the human genome
sequences cost billions of dollars now
we can do it complete not just the DNA
sequencing of our own body the DNA
sequencing of every organism not just
the DNA sequencing the RNA sequencing of
everything that's happening inside our
gut to trillions of these organisms tell
people why it matters DNA versus RNA so
DNA is like an alphabet it can write
anything so you and I share 99.99% same
DNA you at me and a tree shared the 90%
same DNA right
so DNA is simply it can express itself
in any different way that's really an
accurate number you in the tree 90% yeah
Wow it's very interesting thing is if
you look at the RNA so DNA converts into
RNA
after the epigenetic changes have been
made so RNA tells you exactly what is
happening not what could have happened
so DNA tells you potentially everything
that could happen and RNA tells you
exactly what's happening so think of
your RNA as an Instagram here is
snapchat of your life so if you want to
know your Instagram of your life between
you poop test but it's very interesting
I'll just tell you that in the last you
know with the patient's tens of
thousands of patients have gone through
it some of the learnings that we have
had actually have changed at least for
every doctor how our human body
functions for example everyone believes
the hormones estrogen and testosterone
are produced by the human body guess
what we are finding that microbiome is
actually producing the testosterone and
estrogen imagine I mean one sentence I
don't know that but we're seeing them
produce if we see the transcripts or the
microbiome producing these things right
it's we are seeing them actually
becoming the detoxification of toxins
that we are taking because these guys
have to survive for their own survival
the microbiome starts to change and
start to metabolize the toxins into
non-toxic thing and that's the reason if
you live in state China or you live in
India there may be a lot of toxins there
but people find because their microbiome
had started to add just to detoxify
these things and you and I go there we
all get sick because I'm microbiome
didn't know what to do with that right
so we started to see so many things
about how microbiome is not only
communicating among themselves they're
constantly do something called quorum
sensing how many of us are there how
many was of us there and when they start
to see that the quantity is sufficient
enough they start to behave very
differently because they say okay now we
are the boss here and our rule governs
the man who has the gold has the golden
rule right so they constantly are
finding to see are they you know if you
keep eating one type of food guess
what's happening only some set of micro
biomes are getting
they grow into the quantity and they
start to form the biofilm and sit now
guys you are the boss dude this is so
interesting and it's one of those things
that I hope through the show we can
really begin to give people the
information that they're gonna need to
start piecing this together because now
having been on this journey for almost
three years is going well it's been
madness so it started with and and for
anybody watching at home Devine knows
certainly the thumbnail sketch of this
and it's helped out tremendously with
that but I'll walk through this the
steps so she's always had a sensitive
stomach yeah and one day and we just
never really thought about it like if we
went out to Vegas and cut loose she was
gonna have an upset stomach and when I
say upset stomach I mean so she would
get enough so stomach we just knew that
that was gonna be part of it she'd have
cramps for a couple days and and then it
would pass and that was it so didn't
really think about a lot about it and
she used to talk about like oh my
intestines feel inflamed that didn't
make sense to me so I was just kind of
blew it off and then one day three years
ago she was like I'm not feeling well
and then later she calls me from
somewhere else in the office and she was
like no no I'm really not feeling well I
need to go home and then she texts me
and said I just projectile vomited
everywhere I was like wow that's weird
she has the stomach flu that really
sucks and you know but then didn't go
away and so the stomach flu turned into
she just couldn't eat anything I like
everything
upset her and gave her massive cramps
and she is not a complainer so when she
starts complaining I know something's
really wrong and our life whittled down
to four ingredients literally four
ingredients so she was eating basically
three kinds of meat and salt and that
was it she couldn't have vegetables
nothing he was crazy we're getting every
test you can imagine and nothing was
helping and one doctor would say you
have an immune deficiency problem and
you need immunoglobulin transfusions and
we were literally about to do that and I
was like something's just not right
about this but I didn't know enough
about it so but I said let's not do that
that seems scary let's go try to learn
more about this and at that time at
Quest we had
some people in R&D that were dealing in
probiotics and we were starting to talk
about the microbiome and so we've
started asking them questions and that
wasn't solving the problem and so then
we tried ketogenic sand that was the
first thing that really helped and so
that because that brought down the
inflammation yeah so we were like okay
huge win this is gonna be amazing and
then it just stalled out there and that
was when you said oh you should try
volume we tried it and there it's been
absolutely life-changing but it is still
so big and complicated that part of what
I'm hoping and this will probably be an
ongoing series hopefully we'll get you
back again is like people really
understanding why I'm so obsessed with
the changing of the metaphor and
thinking about the microbiome first
understanding how different her
microbiome is from even mine and then
what I really want to know is how do you
repair it over time so think about it
that you know that inflammation happens
obviously is first number one thing is
is to make sure you don't have a toxic
microbiome that means your microbiome is
is producing the healthiest stuff that
your body needs not the toxins that is
going into your body so just really
think of you're saying is your
microbiome healthy is your microbiome
toxic like that's first part the second
thing you can I want to put a fine point
on that because I this is what made me
think of it a second ago that notion of
a quorum yeah so the fact that any one
of them is looking to see if they're the
bully yeah if they get to call the shots
yeah and what happened with Lisa was bad
bacteria God became the lead bacteria
and that's that tipping point if the
tipping point happens when your
ecosystem goes out of balance it's not
the individuals thing that good or bad
so it's really not about as much of good
bacteria bad Becker we all have the good
and bad but what happens is they stay in
check right and each others they all
keep each other in check it is when you
start to eat certain foods and these
guys start to go and this aha
now we're going to control everything
else right and that's really when you
start to have trouble other thing is
where your epithelial cells the barrier
the mucous lining gets thinner you start
to get a leaky gut and then you have a
chronic inflammation all the time
the way you do that is you need to
change the balance of ecosystem of the
microorganism and you need to start
repairing the lining of the gut and you
repair the lining by sometime giving the
right set of supplements and enzymes to
repair the gut lining at the same time
you start to give the prebiotic to feed
the some of the guys so they can start
to grow and Pro by to add some of the
new stuff right and then you start to
change the diet so you're starving the
bad guy then you're starting to prop the
good guys right you're feeding the
things that need to be fed and you're
adjusting to see not just the organisms
you're starting to adjust their
functions so you start to see how much
of the butyrate you are producing and if
you're not producing in a butyrate which
is really good thing then you have to
take some of the butyrate supplement
until we can start to grow these guys
you got who have a potential to promote
to produce butyrate we need to cut down
all the organisms and the food that are
feeding the guys who produce these
proxxon environments so for example when
you go on a paleo diet or ketogenic diet
when you're eating a lot of protein that
actually does tremendous amount of harm
after a certain part most of the protein
should be digested in the small
intestine in the upper side when you eat
too much protein it cannot digest so it
starts to go down you call and with all
these microbes are there and they never
seen the protein before guess what
happens they start to feed the group of
microbiome and they call them protein
fermenters and these protein fermenters
and nasty bastards they start to eat
protein and they start to release
ammonia they start to release all of
these talks and stuff then it starts to
hurt your gut lining right so when you
are on some of these diets you are
actually harming yourself same thing on
a ketogenic diet when you go on a
ketogenic diet and you fasting the
microbes are saying okay you're not
going to feed me you know what I'm gonna
do I'm gonna eat the gut lining so point
is the all the things that are good at
certain point of time they become bad
then they essentially you continue with
that and that is really the key is to
understand that what is the right food
at that point of time and you microbiome
is changing but it really becomes a new
ecosystem every three to four months
right so it's like in a sense you throw
travel in the water you get some ripples
and then it comes back to normal but if
you constantly keep shaking it you start
together massive waves right and that's
what I mean by that is that you know
when you change your diet it starts to
just a ripple and that's a ripple and
then you cause when you start to go into
completely and you died that see
recommended by while then you are
starting to see the swirl and it starts
to get a new ecosystem gets created and
now you have a new balance and if you
don't come if you continue with the same
thing get the balance that we just
created becomes imbalance again because
now these guys are taking over so what
at a really high generic level and I
know there is no universal diet and I
totally get that yeah but like at a high
level what our directional advice that
you have for people of how to eat like
cycling eating wide varieties I mean
again this is exactly what caused all
the problems we have because we want to
simplify and tell people create your
body like a black box and if you just
keep feeding things into it somehow
magic will happen but the fact is you
can't treat like a black box you have to
know what is going on if they're not
producing the right set of nutrients you
have to feed those guys what the
nutrients your body needs so if you're
not getting enough good stuff the
vitamins and then butyrate short chain
fatty-acids you got to feed them or you
have to take that enzymes to essentially
make up for it so you can't just sit
here I'm eating healthy because I'm
eating spinach I'm eating kale I'm
eating avocado guess what that may be
exactly what's wrong for you just like
me you know my story right I thought I
was eating healthy because I was trying
to lose weight
I was trying I was pre-diabetic and I
always thought eating is spinach avocado
oats cut down all the gluten cut down
all the carbs cut down all the starch
and guess what happened for the first
few months I lost weight and I was my
blood glucose was going down and I was
happy I continued with that died guess
what happened I got gained all the way
back and my blood glucose is going back
up again when I did my own tests it
turns out I need to be eating 50% of my
diet as a complex carbohydrate I had to
cut down spinach avocado oats
start eating more wheat cook them and
start eating lot of the other food that
I never eaten okay so everything your
blood Sugar's in check my blood sugar is
went down my doctors thinks that I must
be on some drug that I'm not telling her
she says keep doing whatever you doing
cut it's working I used to take maxim
which was killing me I cut down all the
nexium and I thought you is gonna be so
angry at me she said I'm so glad you're
taking nexium because now you don't have
that stomach acid problem and by the way
you were any making your you know your
iron was no it's our back to normal now
so just keep doing what you're doing
keep taking those drugs that I gave you
what she didn't know is I stopped all of
them and I think is very interesting
thing is a lot of the food sensitivities
go away because food sensitivities when
you measure its you basically measuring
the antibodies in the blood the reason
you get antibodies in the blood is
because the blood is seeing the stuff in
the blood because your system leaky guys
you got so if you have a leaky gut your
immune system is gonna see these food in
the thing it creates the antibodies and
you think you're allergic to it yeah
yeah that sounds super fun I'm looking
at my wife right now who at one point
because she they didn't know she had iki
got yeah they were like essentially
you're allergic to everything and she's
not right once you fix the leaky gut
said only six months later these
antibodies died away and then so knows
you're no longer allergic to them yes
literally what happened to her yeah and
you know to me that is the key is to
understand that you know a why are
people talking nowadays is because
everyone wants to know about their
microbiome other thing is really
understanding the snapshot of what is
that your microbiome doing are they
actually working for you or they working
against you so knowing your superfoods
and you know in your kryptonite's
what food is going to cause these guys
to produce toxins and the stuff that is
not going to be good for your body and
what food is going to allow these guys
to produce the nutrients our body needs
so so what we do is we give you your
super foods we give you your kryptonite
and give you the foods you should be in
eating more off and the food you should
be minimizing and the food you should be
avoiding and as I said it's really
different for different people for me
and my wife is completely opposite
I should be avoiding spinach and oats
and avocado she needs to be eating her
super foods very interesting is that she
and I are completely different food and
you know and in fact now the new test we
just added that are essentially giving
even more information so now we are
adding things like urine metabolites so
we're able to see the organic acids in
the amino acids being produced we are
adding things like a blood
transcriptomics and the idea is to be
able to see the gene expression of
everything that's happening inside the
human body
so you look at the host side which is us
and our guest side so it's two
transcriptomics which we'll call his two
microbe at the microbiome there is two
transcriptomics allows you to see how
our guests are doing even though they
are the Masters right and then a host
side is our side so we look at the
mitochondrial gene expression and then
we look at all of the white blood cell
gene expression that means we can see
every single inflammation marker so we
can see cytokines the interleukins we
can see CRP all the inflammation that
your body is having and all these things
combined including by the way the food
sensitivity test allows us to see do you
have a leaky gut because if you're
sensitive to a whole bunch of foods then
you know you have a leaky gut if you're
eating everything that's showing up in
your arm
IgG the food sensitivity then we know
for sure you have a leaky gut right and
as I said get your together because
you have no idea what people can find
out from it because just a tiny bit of
or a stool we you can find out what
places you have visited because we know
the toxins that came from there we can
find out things like what food you're
eating how much of you are eating what
drugs you're taking what supplements you
may be taking
what type of symptoms you may be having
because all that information is right
there because how much you exercise how
much is the Sun thing yet Helen Astley
says she's like are you really lean yeah
that's do you exercise a lot yeah so
she's like oh yeah this marker shows
that this marker shows that whoa yeah so
DC allows to tell us actually how much
aerobic exercise you're getting Wow yeah
very impressive
dude I don't know if anybody told you
but you've already won you're like super
rich why are you working this hard oh my
god so it's the you know ads you and I
have talked about it in the past
episodes that success is not about
amount of money you have success is
about how many lives you'd be able to
improve and from that bar I'm just so
far me so far to go
you know we've barely started so to me I
am dedicated to doing the things that
matter and and a lot of people who have
watched our previous episodes will know
that I know I came from a very very poor
background with no food to eat with
absolutely nothing and to a large extent
on I mean the society and the people in
this country has given me so much love
and so much success I owe it to them I
mean this is my obligation to pay back
my dad and the only way I know how to
pay back my dad is to pay forward is by
constantly finding ways that can make
the lives better for billions of people
on this planet today I'd focus on
attacking the healthcare problem and
making chronic disease optional I love
the way you think dude all right before
I ask my last question where can they
find you online so I mean you can find
me on Twitter you can find me on
LinkedIn you can find me on Facebook and
I've always given out my email is now my
first name Naveen and a Vee n dot Jen my
last name J AI n at gmail.com send it to
me please if you have any questions
anything just know I'm here to help you
and I want to do everything I can to
make this society a better place for our
children and make our children
essentially protect our planet awesome
and and how can they sign up for volume
if they want you tell them since you
know that you know Indians cannot
pronounce the word go to volume comm
check it out how do you spell VI
and I will say in fact I'll address that
in a second in my outro I have very very
strong feelings but for my last question
what's one change that you want to see
somebody make to improve their life
becoming intellectually curious to me
there is nothing will make this world a
better place nothing will make you
better human being than to be
intellectually curious the day you
become intellectually curious you have
taken the first step towards improving
yourself and the day you change yourself
is the day you can change the world my
only other advice is fall in love with
yourself and I don't mean being
self-obsessed you stop needing the
approval from someone else the day you
fall in love with yourself you can love
the person around you you can love the
world but if you hit yourself you're
gonna hate the world so fall in love
with yourself and share that love with
everyone you meet and stay
intellectually curious I don't get
awesome Naveen thank you so much all
right guys I'm telling you right now my
life was changed by biome in no
uncertain terms and quite frankly from
my friendship with this man here and
when I say that my gratitude knows no
bounds if he asked me to sacrifice goats
I would sacrifice goats we're at that
stage it has been absolutely incredible
what volume has been able to offer us in
terms of information about Lisa's health
it's absolutely incredible I'm not
getting paid for this by the way this is
truly because it had a massive impact on
my life on Lisa's life and it took me
from actually being scared that
something would happen to her to
believing that we're really on the road
to recovery and it's been unlike
anything I've ever seen in my life he is
so passionate about making sure that the
system grows and improves with time and
that the more people that use the system
the more people that it's able to help
and it's absolutely incredible to see
how rapidly it's growing and how we've
been able to benefit from that so if you
suffer from digestive issues of any kind
I cannot strongly enough encourage you
to go to viacom to sign up to give it a
shot I think that it could possibly
truly
change your entire life it's that big
it's that important alright guys
hopefully this episode really helped you
begin to understand the microbiome I
think it is so important and I think
Naveen has the metaphor that's really
gonna change how people think about this
and I don't think you can overstate how
important that is alright if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe
huh and until next time my friends be
legendary take care thank you guys so
much for watching and being a part of
this community if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset cultivating grit and unlocking
your full potential